---
layout: post
title: "Jira to Sparx EA"
tags: [doc, atlassian, asciidoc, sparx]
---

Sparx Enterprise Architect really shines when you use it to model your architecture by creating connections between elements. If you model your requirements, too, EA let's you trace your design from the requirement up to the class.

Problem is, when you work in an agile project, it is likely that your requirements are kept in an issue tracker like Jira in form of User Stories. So traceability is gone. :-(

A solution could be to create a connection between Jira and EA. Sparx provides an [EA Connector for Jira](https://marketplace.atlassian.com/plugins/atlassian.confluence.plugins.eaconnector/cloud/overview), but since I am a techie, my "not invented here"-syndrome kicks in...

DocToolchain already contains a task which fetches certain jira issues ([Living Documents for Agile Projects](https://rdmueller.github.io/Jira/)) and a task which exports useful information from EA ([Did you ever wish you had better Diagrams?](https://rdmueller.github.io/sparx-ea/)). Let's update these tasks the following way:

1. the EA script currently searches for a {adoc:<filename>} - tag in comments. Let's add a {jira:<search>} tag for diagrams
2. whenever such a tag is found, start a groovy script which exports the jira issues defined by <search> to a file
3. the EA script now has to pick up the file and create requirements-elements as diagram sub-elements and sync them with already existing ones

This would allow you to create a traceability between your architecture and the User Stories stored in Jira.

Step 1 is easy - the task already does it for the {adoc:} - tag.

Step 2 is a bit harder. Since there is already groovy code to connect to jira, I decided to integrate groovy into the Visual Basic Script. Not an easy task if you know nearly nothing about VBS, but [Microsoft Technet to the rescue](https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ee156605.aspx)! The following code executes a groovy script vrom within VBS and returns the output:

{% highlight visualbasic %}
Set objShell = CreateObject("WScript.Shell")
objShell.CurrentDirectory = fso.GetFolder("./scripts")
Set objExecObject = objShell.Exec ("cmd /K  groovy exportJira.groovy """ & strSearch &""" & exit")
strReturn = ""
Do While Not objExecObject.StdOut.AtEndOfStream
    strReturn = strReturn & vbCR & objExecObject.StdOut.ReadLine()
Loop
Set objShell = Nothing
{% endhighlight %}

Step 3 should again be very straight forward - since the VBS script gets each single line outputted by the groovy script, elements can easily be synced one by one. But I'll do it only one way.

