---
layout: post
title: "Living Documents for Agile Projects"
tags: [doc, jira, asciidoc, arc42]
---

If you describe a solution architecture, your document will be in an unfinished state for a long time. If you are on an agile project, your document will be a living one. There will be always open questions which need to be tracked. A good idea to track them is the issue tracker which you already use for the code of your project. I not onyl allows you to track the progress on the open issue, it also allows you to assign the open issue to those people who will give you the right answer so your open questions.

Today I will show you how you can turn your asciidoc documentation into a living document by linking it to Jira.

## The Idea

The most trivial way to link to jira is to just add the url of your issue to your text:

    https://example.atlassian.net/browse/DOC-51

You can add the issue id as name of the link in order to just get the issue id linked to your issue

    https://example.atlassian.net/browse/DOC-51[DOC-51]
    
Trivial, but you always have to paste the base URL from somewhere. To make it more convenient, an asciidoctor plugin could make sense. [mrhaki](https://twitter.com/mrhaki) describes in his awesome blog exactly this: [Awesome Asciidoctor: Use Inline Extension DSL with Gradle](http://mrhaki.blogspot.de/2015/03/awesome-asciidoctor-use-inline.html). A detailed description on how to write asciidoctor extensions can be found [in the documentation of the asciidoctor gradle plugin](http://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoctor-gradle-plugin/#adding-custom-extensions).

So, I've added the code from mrhaki to the docToolchain project in a slightly modified version:

{% highlight groovy %}
asciidoctor {
    // Here we can add the code for extensions we write.
    extensions {
        inlinemacro (name: "jira") {
            parent, target, attributes ->

                options = [
                        "type": ":link",
                        "target": "https://jira-instance/browse/${target}".toString(),
                        "id": "${target}"
                ]

                // Create the link to the issue.
                createInline(parent, "anchor", target, attributes, options).render()
        }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

This now lets me link to my issues by just writing

    jira:DOC-51[]
    
don't forget the `[]` - userwise it will not work.

## List of open Issues

But wouldn't it be nice to have also a list of all open issues at the end of the document? Now that we know how to write an inline plugin, I would like to use this mechanism to create a table. Unfortunately, I couldn't finde an example on how to write an extenstion which creates a table, so I do a simple fallback to just create a file which can be included...

Jira has a nice REST api. IMHO, this is even easier to use than the Java-API. This littel code snipped shows how to retrieve all issues of a given project with a given label assigned:



to be continued...
    
