---
layout: post
title: "Did you ever wish you had better Diagrams?"
tags: [sparx, doc, arc42]
---

Let's recap what we did so far: in order to kickstart a documentation project, we've created a dual gradle / maven asciidoc build with included arc42 template in two languages and easy textual diagram drawing with planUML. That's already quite a feature list!

But what if plantUML diagrams are not enough for your needs? What if you can't rely on the auto-layout feature of plantUML?

One solution would be to just start up your favourite diagramming tool, draw your diagrams, export them and reference them from asciidoc. No problem. But what if you need to update one of the diagrams? Or you just worked the whole day on some diagrams and you don't know anymore which ones to re-export?

## Wouldn't it be nice if your build just takes care of it? 

It could just search for your diagrams files and export them.

That's exactly what we will add today. Since there are two many diagramming tools on the market to include them all in one post, I will stick to [Sparx Enterprise Architect](http://www.sparxsystems.com/). Enterprise Architect - or short jsut EA - is a powerful but yet affordable tool which can be easily scripted.

There are several options for scripting like internal scripts written in [JavaScript, JScript and VBScript](http://www.sparxsystems.com/enterprise_architect_user_guide/12.1/automation_and_scripting/the_scripter_window.html). These scripts have to be invoked manually from within the application. Another option is to use the [automation interface](http://www.sparxsystems.com/enterprise_architect_user_guide/12.1/automation_and_scripting/usingtheautomationinterface.html) and "remote control" the application from outside. This can be done in various languages (all which have access to the ActiveX COM interface). There is a java bridge included and VBS would be the native approach.

In the past I already played around with the included java interface and had the feeling that it is a little bit incomplete or buggy. That's why I soon switched to VisualBasic as scripting for EA - this avoids an additional layer between me and the application.

## Features

The script I want to include into our build will have several tasks:

* find all EA repositories within the project
* open the found repositories through EA
* export all diagrams and save them with their given name as file name
* as bonus, check all element notes and export those which start with {adoc: filename}

I've chose to use the given name of a diagram for the file name because I think it is easier to handle and speaks for itself. Drawback is that you have to make sure that the name is a valid file name and it is unique. Another aproach would be to use the quite cryptic object ID (GUID)

What's up with the bonus tasks? Working with EA, I like to directly write my comments and descriptions in the note fields of the diagram elements. By prefixing them with {adoc: filename}, I can decide to export and easily include them into my documentation. This way, the written documentation for a diagram can be directly maintained within EA.

## Code

The following is the VB-Script code which does all the hard work:

{% highlight visualbasic %}
    ' based on the "Project Interface Example" which comes with EA
    ' http://stackoverflow.com/questions/1441479/automated-method-to-export-enterprise-architect-diagrams

    Dim EAapp 'As EA.App
    Dim Repository 'As EA.Repository
    Dim FS 'As Scripting.FileSystemObject

    Dim projectInterface 'As EA.Project

    ' Helper
    ' http://windowsitpro.com/windows/jsi-tip-10441-how-can-vbscript-create-multiple-folders-path-mkdir-command
    Function MakeDir (strPath)
      Dim strParentPath, objFSO
      Set objFSO = CreateObject("Scripting.FileSystemObject")
      On Error Resume Next
      strParentPath = objFSO.GetParentFolderName(strPath)

      If Not objFSO.FolderExists(strParentPath) Then MakeDir strParentPath
      If Not objFSO.FolderExists(strPath) Then objFSO.CreateFolder strPath
      On Error Goto 0
      MakeDir = objFSO.FolderExists(strPath)

    End Function

    '
    ' Recursively saves all diagrams under the provided package and its children
    '
    Sub DumpDiagrams(thePackage,currentModel)

        Set currentPackage = thePackage
        Const   ForAppending = 8

        For Each currentElement In currentPackage.Elements
            If (Left(currentElement.Notes, 6) = "{adoc:") Then
                strFileName = Mid(currentElement.Notes,7,InStr(currentElement.Notes,"}")-7)
                strNotes = Right(currentElement.Notes,Len(currentElement.Notes)-InStr(currentElement.Notes,"}"))
                set objFSO = CreateObject("Scripting.FileSystemObject")
		            If (currentModel.Name="Model") Then
    	            ' When we work with the default model, we don't need a sub directory
      	          path = "../src/docs/ea/asciidoc/"
      	        Else
      	          path = "../src/docs/ea/asciidoc/"&currentModel.Name&"/"
      	      	End If
                MakeDir(path)
                WScript.echo path&strFileName
                set objFile = objFSO.OpenTextFile(path&strFileName&".ad",ForAppending, True)
                objFile.WriteLine(vbCRLF&vbCRLF&"."&currentElement.Name&vbCRLF&strNotes)
                objFile.Close
            End If
        Next
        ' Iterate through all diagrams in the current package
        For Each currentDiagram In currentPackage.Diagrams

            ' Open the diagram
            Repository.OpenDiagram(currentDiagram.DiagramID)

            ' Save and close the diagram
            If (currentModel.Name="Model") Then
                ' When we work with the default model, we don't need a sub directory
                path = "/src/docs/ea/images/"
            Else
                path = "/src/docs/ea/images/" & currentModel.Name & "/"
            End If
            filename = path & currentDiagram.Name & ".png"
            MakeDir(".." & path)
            projectInterface.SaveDiagramImageToFile(fso.GetAbsolutePathName("..")&filename)
            WScript.echo " extracted image to ." & filename
            Repository.CloseDiagram(currentDiagram.DiagramID)
        Next

        ' Process child packages
        Dim childPackage 'as EA.Package
        For Each childPackage In currentPackage.Packages
            call DumpDiagrams(childPackage, currentModel)
        Next

    End Sub

		Function SearchEAProjects(path)
		
		  For Each folder In path.SubFolders
		    SearchEAProjects folder
		  Next
		  
		  For Each file In path.Files
				If fso.GetExtensionName (file.Path) = "eap" Then
					WScript.echo "found "&file.path
					OpenProject(file.Path)          
				End If
		  Next
		
    End Function

    Sub OpenProject(file)
      ' open Enterprise Architect
      Set EAapp = CreateObject("EA.App")
      WScript.echo "opening Enterprise Architect. This might take a moment..."
      ' load project
      EAapp.Repository.OpenFile(file)
      ' make Enterprise Architect to not appear on screen
      EAapp.Visible = False

      ' get repository object
      Set Repository = EAapp.Repository
      ' Show the script output window
      ' Repository.EnsureOutputVisible("Script")

      Set projectInterface = Repository.GetProjectInterface()

      ' Iterate through all model nodes
      Dim currentModel 'As EA.Package
      For Each currentModel In Repository.Models
        ' Iterate through all child packages and save out their diagrams
        Dim childPackage 'As EA.Package
        For Each childPackage In currentModel.Packages
          call DumpDiagrams(childPackage,currentModel)
        Next
      Next
      EAapp.Repository.CloseFile()
    End Sub

  set fso = CreateObject("Scripting.fileSystemObject") 
  WScript.echo "Image extractor"
  WScript.echo "looking for .eap files in " & fso.GetAbsolutePathName("..") & "/src"
  'Dim f As Scripting.Files
  SearchEAProjects fso.GetFolder("../src")
  WScript.echo "finished exporting images"

{% endhighlight %}
