---
layout: post
title: "Jira to Sparx EA"
tags: [doc, atlassian, asciidoc, sparx]
---

Sparx Enterprise Architect really shines when you use it to model your architecture by creating connections between elements. If you model your requirements, too, EA let's you trace your design from the requirement up to the class.

Problem is, when you work in an agile project, it is likely that your requirements are kept in an issue tracker like Jira in form of User Stories. So traceability is gone. :-(

A solution could be to create a connection between Jira and EA. Sparx provides an [EA Connector for Jira](https://marketplace.atlassian.com/plugins/atlassian.confluence.plugins.eaconnector/cloud/overview), but since I am a techie, my "not invented here"-syndrome kicks in...

DocToolchain already contains a task which fetches certain jira issues ([Living Documents for Agile Projects](https://rdmueller.github.io/Jira/)) and a task which exports useful information from EA ([Did you ever wish you had better Diagrams?](https://rdmueller.github.io/sparx-ea/)). Let's update these tasks the following way:

1. the EA script currently searches for a {adoc:<filename>} - tag in comments. Let's add a {jira:<search>} tag for diagrams
2. whenever such a tag is found, start a groovy script which exports the jira issues defined by <search> to a file
3. the EA script now has to pick up the file and create requirements-elements as diagram sub-elements and sync them with already existing ones

This would allow you to create a traceability between your architecture and the User Stories stored in Jira.

